WebAuthn authenticator guide For Java (#3286)
okta/okta-developer-docs: packages/@okta/vuepress-site/docs/guides/authenticators-web-authn/main/java/enrollmentintegrationsteps.md

### 1: Start enrollment flow

> The first step is to initiate a use case that requires authentication. This guide uses the sign-in with username and password flow that is initiated with calls to `IDXAuthenticatorWrapper.begin()`, `AuthenticationResponse.getProceedContext()`, and `IDXAuthenticatorWrapper.authenticate()`.

Author: updated.

```java

> AuthenticationResponse beginResponse = idxAuthenticationWrapper.begin();

Author: I'm confused over this one. This code block is identical in both flows.

ProceedContext proceedContext = beginResponse.getProceedContext();

AuthenticationResponse authenticationResponse;
authenticationResponse = idxAuthenticationWrapper.authenticate(
          new AuthenticationOptions(username, password.toCharArray()), proceedContext);
```

### 2: Display WebAuthn option

> After the user submits their password, make a call to `IDXAuthenticationWrapper.verifyAuthenticator()` to verify their password. If you configure your Okta org as detailed in [Configuration updates](#update-configurations) and WebAuthn is **not** already [enrolled](#integrate-sdk-for-authenticator-enrollment) for the user, `verifyAuthenticator()` returns an `AuthenticationResponse` object with `authenticationStatus` equal to `AWAITING_AUTHENTICATOR_ENROLLMENT_SELECTION` and a `webauthn` authenticator item in the `authenticators` array.

Author: I changed it to authenticate().

> After the user submits their password, make a call to `IDXAuthenticationWrapper.verifyAuthenticator()` to verify their password. If you configure your Okta org as detailed in [Configuration updates](#update-configurations) and WebAuthn is **not** already [enrolled](#integrate-sdk-for-authenticator-enrollment) for the user, `verifyAuthenticator()` returns an `AuthenticationResponse` object with `authenticationStatus` equal to `AWAITING_AUTHENTICATOR_ENROLLMENT_SELECTION` and a `webauthn` authenticator item in the `authenticators` array.

Author: I confirmed with Arvind. The Java sample app can either be identifier first or require username and password based on an org setting. In this guide we are discussing the username and pwd flow.

```json
{
  "authenticationStatus": "AWAITING_AUTHENTICATOR_ENROLLMENT_SELECTION",
  "authenticators": [
    {
    "id": "autc4m63eWYtQ0x3c696",
    "type": "webauthn",
    "label": "Security Key or Biometric",
    "factors": [{
    "id": "autc4m63eWYtQ0x3c696",
    "method": "webauthn",
    "label": "Security Key or Biometric"
    }],
    "hasNestedFactors": false
    }]
}
```

Use the `type` and `label` properties to show the available list of authenticators to the user. The sample app constructs a dropdown list using the [Thymeleaf](https://www.thymeleaf.org/) template engine.

```xml
<tr th:each="authenticator : ${authenticators}">
    <div class="form-check">
        <input class="form-check-input" type="radio" name="authenticator-type" th:value="${authenticator.label}" checked="true">
        <label class="form-check-label" th:text="${authenticator.label}"></label>
    </div>
</tr>
```

> Authenticator selection page example from the sample app:

Author: updated.

<div class="common-image-format">

![Page showing webauthn option in list](/img/authenticators/authenticators-webauthn-java-enroll-dropdown-selection.png)

</div>

### 3:  Submit WebAuthn option

> When the user selects the WebAuthn option and clicks submit, call `IDXAuthenticatorWrapper.enrollAuthenticator()` passing in `ProceedContext` and the authenticator Id returned from `AuthenticationResponse.authenticators[n].factors[n].id`.

Author: updated.

```java
Optional<Authenticator> authenticatorOptional =

>                     authenticators.stream().filter(auth -> auth.getType().equals("webauthn")).findFirst();

Author: updated.

String authId = authenticatorOptional.get().getId();

AuthenticationResponse enrollResponse = idxAuthenticationWrapper.enrollAuthenticator(proceedContext, authId);

```

### 4: Identify data for creating a new credential

The `AuthenticationResponse` object from `IDXAuthenticatorWrapper.enrollAuthenticator()` has `authenticationStatus` set to `AWAITING_AUTHENTICATOR_VERIFICATION`, which indicates the user must verify their WebAuthn credentials. Additionally, `AuthenticationResponse` returns the challenge and other information needed to verify the WebAuthn credentials on the user's device.

```json
{
	"authenticationStatus": "AWAITING_AUTHENTICATOR_ENROLLMENT", `
	"webAuthnParams": {
		"currentAuthenticator": {
			"value": {
				"type": "security_key",
				"id": "autc4m63eWYtQ0x3...",
				"key": "webauthn",
				"displayName": "Security Key or Biometric",
				"contextualData": {
					"activationData": {
						"user": {
							"id": "00uunttkoePFgXjQO696",
							"name": "johndoe@email.com",
							"displayName": "John Doe"
						},
						"challenge": "pMhDjTZmaxwBYqLe4-mpOSCVbafd..."
					}
				}
			}
		}
	}
}
```

### 5: Display page to verify WebAuthn credentials

> Redirect the user to a page that creates the WebAuthn credentials and allow this page access to the `AuthenticationResponse` properties. Using the sample app as guide, access these properties with the following steps:

Author: removed.

        const userId = "00uuoauaxfdMkYw4...";
        const username = "johndoe@gmail.com";
        const displayName = "John Doe";
    </script>
    ```

### 6: Build the parameter for creating a new credential

On page load, create the parameter needed to make a new credential. When creating this parameter, use the `challenge` and `user.id` properties.

```javascript
const publicKeyCredentialCreationOptions = {
    rp: {
        name: "localhost",
        id: "localhost",
    },
    challenge: strToBin(challenge),
    user: {
        id: strToBin(userId),
        name: name,
        displayName: displayName,
    },
    pubKeyCredParams: [{alg: -7, type: "public-key"}],
};

function strToBin(str) {
    return Uint8Array.from(atob(base64UrlSafeToBase64(str)), c => c.charCodeAt(0));
}
```

### 7: Create a new credential

Call the Web Authentication API's `navigator.credentials.create()` in the client browser and pass in the `CredentialCreationOptions` object created in the previous step.

```javascript
navigator.credentials.create({
        publicKey: publicKeyCredentialCreationOptions
    }).then((newCredential) ...
```

This call initiates the following steps:

> 1. Browser prompts the user to choose an authenticator.

Author: updated.

<div class="common-image-format">

![UI showing the authenticator options](/img/authenticators/authenticators-webauthn-authenticator-options.png)

</div>

> 2. After the user chooses the authenticator, the device's local authenticator asks for consent to create the credentials. In the following example, the **Touch ID** authenticator prompts the user for a fingerprint to confirm the consent.

Author: A local authenticator can be the platform or a roaming authenticator like a yubi key. That content did come from a reputable source but it does sound odd. Without needing to get to low level, I changed "device's local authenticator asks for conset" to just "device asks for consent".

<div class="common-image-format">

![UI showing user consent through fingerprint verification](/img/authenticators/authenticators-webauthn-user-consent.png)

</div></br>

3. The private and public key pairs are created. The private key is stored internally on the device and linked to the user and domain name. Specifically, `navigator.credentials.create()` returns an object of type `PublicKeyCredential` containing the public key, credential ID, and other information used to associate the new credential with the server and browser.

    ```json
    {
    "id": "Aa9rTddZCalI...",
    "rawId": ..,
    "response" : {
      "attestationObject" : Binary data ... ,
      "clientDataJSON": Binary data ... ,
    "type": "public-key"
    }
    ```

### 8: Build the parameter for sending the public key to the Okta server

> The returned `PublicKeyCredential` object contains the signature and other binary formatted data that you need to convert to strings before sending it back to the Okta servers. The sample app uses client-side javascript to convert this data into a variable.

Author: updated.

        "attestation": attestationObject
    };

    const options = {
        method: 'POST',
        body: JSON.stringify(params),
        headers: { "Content-type": "application/json; charset=UTF-8" }
    };

function binToStr(bin) {
          return btoa(new Uint8Array(bin).reduce((s, byte) => s + String.fromCharCode(byte), ''));
      }
```

### 9: Forward signature to Okta for enrollment

Forward the signature to Okta for validation. Specifically, perform the following steps:

1. First, send the converted signature data to the Okta SDK. The sample app sends the data through an HTTP Post request from the client browser to the server.

    ```javascript
    fetch("/enroll-webauthn", options)
                    .then(res => {
    ```

2. Next, send the data to `IDXAuthenticationWrapper.verifyWebAuthn()` to have the server validate the signature and store the credential ID and public key associated with the user's account.

    ```java
    ProceedContext proceedContext = Util.getProceedContextFromSession(session);

    AuthenticationResponse authenticationResponse = idxAuthenticationWrapper.verifyWebAuthn(
      proceedContext, webauthnRequest);
    ```

> 3. Depending on the org configuration, the `AuthenticationResponse` from `idxAuthenticationWrapper.verifyWebAuthn()` can return an `authenticationStatus` of `SUCCESS` along with token information, or another status indicating there are additional remediation steps to complete.

Author: updated.

            th:value="${authenticator.label}" checked="true">
        <label class="form-check-label" th:text="${authenticator.label}"></label>
    </div>
</tr>
```

A simple authenticator selection page should look like this:

<div class="common-image-format">

![A page showing a list of authenticators available for the user to enroll. The WebAuthn option is labelled Security Key or Biometric.](/img/authenticators/authenticators-webauthn-java-enroll-dropdown-selection.png "A simple authenticator selection page")

</div>

### 3:  Submit WebAuthn option

When the user selects the WebAuthn option, call `IDXAuthenticatorWrapper.enrollAuthenticator()` passing in `ProceedContext` and the authenticator ID returned from `AuthenticationResponse.authenticators[n].factors[n].id`.

```java
Optional<Authenticator> authenticatorOptional =
    authenticators.stream().filter(auth -> auth.getType().equals("webauthn")).findFirst();
String authId = authenticatorOptional.get().getId();

AuthenticationResponse enrollResponse =
  idxAuthenticationWrapper.enrollAuthenticator(proceedContext, authId);

```

### 4: Identify data for creating a new credential

> The `AuthenticationResponse` object returned by `IDXAuthenticatorWrapper.enrollAuthenticator()` has `authenticationStatus` set to `AWAITING_AUTHENTICATOR_VERIFICATION`, indicating the user must verify their WebAuthn credentials. `AuthenticationResponse` returns the challenge and other information needed to verify the WebAuthn credentials on the user's device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `AuthenticationResponse` object returned by `IDXAuthenticatorWrapper.enrollAuthenticator()` has `authenticationStatus` set to `AWAITING_AUTHENTICATOR_VERIFICATION`, which indicates that the user must verify their WebAuthn credentials. `AuthenticationResponse` returns the challenge and other information needed to verify the WebAuthn credentials on the user's device.
```

```json
{
	"authenticationStatus": "AWAITING_AUTHENTICATOR_ENROLLMENT",
	"webAuthnParams": {
		"currentAuthenticator": {
			"value": {
				"type": "security_key",
				"id": "autc4m63eWYtQ0x3...",
				"key": "webauthn",
				"displayName": "Security Key or Biometric",
				"contextualData": {
					"activationData": {
						"user": {
							"id": "00uunttkoePFgXjQO696",
							"name": "johndoe@email.com",
							"displayName": "John Doe"
						},
						"challenge": "pMhDjTZmaxwBYqLe4-mpOSCVbafd..."
					}
				}
			}
		}
	}
}
```

### 5: Display page to verify WebAuthn credentials

Redirect the user to a page that creates the WebAuthn credentials and allow this page access to the `AuthenticationResponse` properties.

1. Call `ModelandView.addObject()` and add `AuthenticationResponse.currentAuthenticator`, which is used later to extract the `challenge` and other data.

    ```java
    modelAndView = new ModelAndView("enroll-webauthn-authenticator");
    modelAndView.addObject("title", "Enroll WebAuthn Authenticator");
    modelAndView.addObject("currentAuthenticator",
            enrollResponse.getWebAuthnParams().getCurrentAuthenticator());
    ```

> 2. Set client-side javascript variables to values originating from `currentAuthenticator`. These variables are used later to create the credential.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Set client-side javascript variables to values that originate from `currentAuthenticator`. These variables are used later to create the credential.
```

        const userId = "00uuoauaxfdMkYw4...";
        const username = "johndoe@gmail.com";
        const displayName = "John Doe";
    </script>
    ```

### 6: Build the parameter for creating a new credential

On page load, create the parameter needed to make a new credential. When creating this parameter, use the `challenge` and `user.id` properties.

```javascript
const publicKeyCredentialCreationOptions = {
    rp: {
        name: "localhost",
        id: "localhost",
    },
    challenge: strToBin(challenge),
    user: {
        id: strToBin(userId),
        name: name,
        displayName: displayName,
    },
    pubKeyCredParams: [{alg: -7, type: "public-key"}],
};

function strToBin(str) {
    return Uint8Array.from(atob(base64UrlSafeToBase64(str)), c => c.charCodeAt(0));
}
```

### 7: Create a new credential

Call `navigator.credentials.create()` in the client browser and pass in the `CredentialCreationOptions` object created in the previous step.

```javascript
navigator.credentials.create({
        publicKey: publicKeyCredentialCreationOptions
    }).then((newCredential) ...
```

This call initiates the following steps:

> 1. The browser prompts the user to choose the type of WebAuthn authenticator they are using. For example, a portable hardware authenticator such as a USB security key, or a software-based authenticator such as a fingerprint scanner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The browser prompts the user to choose the type of WebAuthn authenticator that they are using. For example: a portable hardware authenticator such as a USB security key or a software-based authenticator such as a fingerprint scanner
```

<div class="common-image-format">

![A UI showing the available authenticator options](/img/authenticators/authenticators-webauthn-authenticator-options.png "Available webAuthn authenticators")

</div>

2. After the user chooses the authenticator, the device asks for consent to create the credentials. In the following example, the **Touch ID** authenticator prompts the user for a fingerprint to confirm the consent.

<div class="common-image-format">

![A prompt from Google Chrome asking to either use Touch ID or password to verify the user's identity](/img/authenticators/authenticators-webauthn-user-consent.png "Verify your identity prompt")

</div></br>

> 3. The private and public key pairs are created. The private key is stored internally on the device and linked to the user and domain name. Specifically, `navigator.credentials.create()` returns an object of type `PublicKeyCredential` containing the public key, credential ID, and other information used to associate the new credential with the server and browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. The private and public key pairs are created. The private key is stored internally on the device and linked to the user and domain name. Specifically, `navigator.credentials.create()` returns an object of type `PublicKeyCredential` that contains the public key, credential ID, and other information used to associate the new credential with the server and browser.
```

    ```json
    {
    "id": "Aa9rTddZCalI...",
    "rawId": ..,
    "response" : {
      "attestationObject" : Binary data ... ,
      "clientDataJSON": Binary data ... ,
    "type": "public-key"
    }
    ```

### 8: Build the parameter for sending the public key to the Okta server

> The returned `PublicKeyCredential` object contains the signature and other binary-formatted data you need to convert to strings before sending it back to the Okta servers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The returned `PublicKeyCredential` object contains the signature and other binary-formatted data that you need to convert to strings before sending it back to the Okta servers.
```

    const params = {
        "clientData": clientDataJSON,
        "attestation": attestationObject
    };

    const options = {
        method: 'POST',
        body: JSON.stringify(params),
        headers: { "Content-type": "application/json; charset=UTF-8" }
    };

function binToStr(bin) {
          return btoa(new Uint8Array(bin).reduce((s, byte) => s + String.fromCharCode(byte), ''));
      }
```

### 9: Forward signature to Okta for enrollment

Forward the signature to Okta for validation. Specifically, perform the following steps:

1. First, send the converted signature to your app using an HTTP Post request from the client browser to the server.

    ```javascript
    fetch("/enroll-webauthn", options)
                    .then(res => {
    ```

2. Next, send the data to `IDXAuthenticationWrapper.verifyWebAuthn()` to have the server validate the signature and store the credential ID and public key associated with the user's account.

    ```java
    ProceedContext proceedContext = Util.getProceedContextFromSession(session);

    AuthenticationResponse authenticationResponse = idxAuthenticationWrapper.verifyWebAuthn(
      proceedContext, webauthnRequest);
    ```

> 3. Depending on the org configuration, the `AuthenticationResponse` returned by `IDXAuthenticationWrapper.verifyWebAuthn()` may contain `authenticationStatus` of `SUCCESS` along with token information, or another status indicating there are further remediation steps to complete.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Depending on the org configuration, the `AuthenticationResponse` returned by `IDXAuthenticationWrapper.verifyWebAuthn()` may contain `authenticationStatus` of `SUCCESS` along with token information, or another status to indicate that there are further remediation steps to complete.
```
